---
layout: post
title: A reader writes
date: 2010-01-18 18:45:23.000000000 +00:00
---
Just got this interesting email. My reply follows.
<blockquote>
<div>Dominic,</div>
<div>I'm sorry if this email is, in any way (from the subject down to the  signature) offensive, bothering, time wasting or anything like that to you. The  sole purpose of this email is to better understand some things about your kind  of career/profession, which is also mine. Furthermore, I'm not asking for  anything besides information -- and from your site I infer that you like to  share your thoughts, so...</div>
<div>First, let me introduce myself. I'm a consultant working for a  multi-national company. My specialty is System Architecture, and while the title  is vague, what I actually do is design systems through the use of UML diagrams,  a lot of documenting, etc. Usually I spend even more time implementing stuff,  from C/C++ to bash shells to C# to COBOL even. I'm very fond of technology, and  I chose my career when I was very young -- about 10 years old. Back then my  desire was to work with videogames (like most children with such love for  gadgets and computers, I guess) but since I live in Brazil, I was forced to  abandon that path some years ago.</div>
<div>I stumbled upon your website when looking for the maximum theoretical limit  for the length of an email address. I needed that piece of information to define  an entity in my database, and I wanted a number that was right from theory. When  reading the article on the site, however, something struck me as odd. Your  profile, on the left portion of the page, read "IT director". But I was reading  a purely technical article! That's incredible. Here, both at my company and, as  far as I can tell, my country, techies doesn't go too far up companies  hierarchies. So I decided that you were not, in fact, what I call "techie". You  are probably more, a guy with both systems expertise and managing skills. Still,  such a profile doesn't make much sense to me.</div>
<div>In my company, after as little as 5 years, you can get a managing position.  And when that happens, it's no longer expected that the worker learns how to  implement specific things. In fact, the only thing people seem to be able to do  afterwards is learn what a particular technology is capable of. For example,  managers here know about SOA, about .Net, about ESBs, about Clouds. They know  what they are and how they can help business. However, they don't know how those  stuff works. You, however, seems to know deeply at least about PHP, a good deal  about REGEXes, etc. These skills, if not used, are forgotten, so I'm guessing  you have a tight connection with technology. I'm sure you don't look at source  codes or solve complex math problems for your analysts, but I think you get in  touch with them and probably study deep technology during breaks.</div>
<div>I assumed a lot of stuff up there but, if I'm right about most of it, my  question is, how do you do it? How do you balance being a good Technologist with  being a manager? Is there some kind of synergy between them? Does your bosses  took your tech skills into knowledge as you progressed through your career? Or  maybe I'm completly wrong and you don't manage people, being just the big fish  when it comes to technology (highly improbable, but still...)...?</div>
<div>I'm know that, from what I've written there's a good chance that you take  me for a fool. These questions have been storming my mind for some months now,  and I've always wanted to ask someone with more time in the market than  myself...</div>
<div>Thanks a lot for reading,</div>
<div>X</div></blockquote>
<div>
<div><span style="font-family:Calibri;">Dear X,</span></div>
<div><span style="font-family:Calibri;">I was lucky enough to work in an IT department that  valued technical expertise very highly. Even though I ended up as a fairly  typical manager (death by PowerPoint) I was still in a community that respected  technical skills, especially when they were married to communication skills that  did not exclude non-technical people.</span></div>
<div><span style="font-family:Calibri;">Unfortunately all good things come to an end and I am  now working solo as a consultant in the Financial Service industry (I will  update my web page soon). This work is somewhat stochastic and in my spare time  I can indulge my technical skills (not as much as I'd like to  though).</span></div>
<div><span style="font-family:Calibri;">I don't see any reason why you can't be both a manager  and a technician. But to succeed in the competitive world of corporate  management you need a certain set of skills (sharp elbows and political nous).  It's a rare person who has both these skills and deep technical skills. This  might be because deep technical skills used to come with poor personal hygiene  and an introspective personality - I don't know why, I'm not a  psychologist.</span></div>
<div><span style="font-family:Calibri;">Increasingly, technical skills are respected in the real  world outside IT. I believe this will lead to "normal" people getting interested  in technology (it's already happening). You will see more managers (and company  directors) with a technical background in the future.</span></div>
<div><span style="font-family:Calibri;">Corporations value management skills more highly than  technical skills. If you are in a management position then any technical  activity is likely to be regarded as a waste of your valuable time. I agree with  you this is wrong. I think it's because today's managers have no technical  background and are suspicious of those who do. Thus, this will also change as  more managers with technical skills are promoted.</span></div>
<div><span style="font-family:Calibri;">Keep going with your technical activities. You are  clearly a good communicator, so there's no reason why you shouldn't do  both.</span></div>
<div><span style="font-family:Calibri;">Just some random thoughts,</span></div>
<div><span style="font-family:Calibri;">Regards,</span></div>
<div><span style="font-family:Calibri;">Dominic</span></div>
</div>
